{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red25\green25\blue25;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c12941\c12941\c12941;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww20500\viewh20300\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs28 \cf0 \
\
\
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0
\cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
\
***********************\
Referee: 1\
\
Recommendation: Needs Minor Revision\
\
Comments:\
The Power of the Weak\
\
This submission studies equivalences between fragments of the mu calculus and bisimulation invariant fragments of MSO over arbitrary LTSs (as opposed to binary trees where the correspondence between alternation-free mu calculus and WMSO is known). In particular, the authors a) give a syntactic characterisation of the fragment of the mu calculus that is equivalent to WMSO (so called continuous fragment), and b) define a fragment of MSO, the noetherian fragment, that is equally expressive on LTS as the alternation free mu calculus.\
\
\
Another contributions of this paper is to highlight some of the subtle differences in expressivity of fragments of muML and other logics when interpreted on LTSs vs binary trees. This is a healthy reminder of an easily ignored issue.\
\
I very much like the presentation of MSO as mu calculus/automata with the modalities replaces with a one-step logic that uses equality (bottom of page 3). I don't know whether this is a novel insight, but it's the first time I see it, and I find it enlightening and indeed of independent interest.\
\
Significance and potential impact\
In brief, the results presented in the submission are without doubt interesting.\
However, their potential impact is, in my opinion, reduced by the lack of didactic care throughout the paper. Indeed, while the authors take very seriously the task of convincing the reader that the results are correct, they do not take the time to explain what properites the various fragments are able to express. The reader is given the syntactic definitions followed by over 30 pages of very technical developments, without any intuition or examples of what kind of properties can be expressed with the defined fragments. Hence all but the most dedicated readers are likely to be left with very little to take home.\
\
In my opinion, the readership of this paper could be widened beyond those who already understand the involved fragments well by taking more care to explain the fragments, giving enlightening examples throughout, and guiding the reader through the proofs. I for one, am very interested in the results presented, and could conceivably use some of these ideas in my own work, but even after spending significant time with this paper am not able to tell you what properties are or are not expressible with these fragments, and therefore am unlikely to be able to work with them.\
\
\
Correctness\
The results seem plausible and the technical development is written with arduous rigour, which makes the proofs look correct. Unfortunately the technical development is not acompanied by sufficient explanations and intuitions to guide the reader through the proof, so I was unable to check them myself.\
\
\
Overall, this is a solid paper with interesting, rigorously presented results. It could probably be published as it is, but I believe it to be in the interest of the community for these results to be more accessible (and, as a by-product, verifiable). Indeed, if the authors were to add enlightening examples to illustrate the characterisations they define, and put additional effort into guiding the reader through the technical developments, then the readers of this paper will hopefully also be able to enjoy these nice results.\
With this in mind I suggest the following revisions:\
- Carefully constructed examples of noetherian property and non-noetherian properties, continuous, cocontinuous and non-continuous and non-cocontinuous properties, with a discussion of their intersection and why they collapse on binary trees, whether they collapse on any class of fixed-arity tree etc.\
- More intuitive explanations guiding the reader through the proofs.\
- Some indication of which proofs are "as expected" (for example, unless I missed something, there's nothing surprising or particularly difficult in the construcitons of Section 4? If there is, the difficulties should be highlighted), and where novel ideas are used.\
\
Inline comments.\
Abstract\
"are equivalent modulo bisimilarity on binary trees" \
- I find this statement confusing. If you have a binary tree with left and right children, doesn't bisimilarity imply equivalence?\
\
***** 
\b We changed the wording\

\b0 \
Introduction\
\
Why does D indicate alternation free mu calculus?\
\
*****
\b  We replaced D with N (for noetherian)
\b0 \
\
"variables bound my least fixpoint operators cannot occur in subformulas 'controlled' by a greatest fixpoint operator and vice-versa"\
--> cannot occur *free*\
or "a least and greatest fixpoint variable can not occur free in the same subformula" (at least I think that's equivalent)\
\
*****
\b  This part has been rewritten\

\b0 \
"our best model-checking algorithms for muML are exponential"\
--> This is no longer the case. See Calude et al's quasi-polynomial and fixed-parameter tractability results for example.\
\
***** 
\b This part has been rewritten\

\b0 \
"as soon as we allow for infinite branching..."\
- You could, perhaps dvelve a bit more on infinite vs finite branching and bisimulation invariance. Intuitively, don't you get infinite branching "for free" in the following sense: the subformulas of a muML formulas can only distinguish a finite number of equivalence classes, so infinitely branching LTSs are indistuingishable from finitely branching ones from the ptw of a muML formula.\
\

\b ***** TODO
\b0 \
\
"a new modal logic mu_cML"\
- why c? Oh, you explain a paragraph later.\
\

\b ***** ok then
\b0 \
\
- Can you provide an intuition of what is expressible by a mu_cML vs mu_dML?\
\
***** 
\b We do this in section 3
\b0 \
\
"bundle of paths"\
- ??\
\
**** 
\b We make now an explicit reference to the formal definition
\b0 \
\
"restriction to finitely branching"\
- do you mean fixed branching? Please clarify what happens in the case of unbounded but finite branching? Is it the same as infinite branching?\
\
***** 
\b We added a sentence to clarify what we mean by finitely branching
\b0 \
\
"... disappears once we focus on the bisimulation-invariant part"\
- Isn't this a consequence of finite bisimulation invariant formulas not being able to distuinguish infinite branching? I suppose the new results also say this, but it seems like this is a more general property of bisimulation invariance.\
\

\b ***** TODO
\b0 \
\
Section 3.\
While this section is beautifully precise and rigorous, it is very dense and an arduous section to read.\
In particular it suffers from a lack of examples to lead the intuition of the reader through the technical development. Could you give examples of monotone, B-continuous and B-cocontinuous formulas?\'a0 Can you give a simple example of a (syntactically) monotone and non-monotone formula that are semantically equivalent? Same quesiton for\'a0 B-(co)continuity. And examples of semantically non-monotone, and B-(co)continuous formulas?\
\

\b ***** We added various clarifying examples to this part
\b0 \
\
\
Definition 3.1. Try to be consistent with using italics on the terms being defined.\
monadic predicate -> no italics\
\

\b ***** ok, done
\b0 \
\
- the phrasing is a bit ambiguous regarding whether one-step formulas are defined or being defined.\
\

\b ***** We rephrased this sentence.
\b0 \
\
Definition 3.8 \
"... in the condition above, we then obtain"\
-the different sentence structure makes the mapping between the two analoguous cases difficult to parse. Rephrasing would make it easier to read.\
\

\b ***** We rephrased this
\b0 \
\
Definition 3.10 "for any g"\
- all or some?\
\

\b ***** We rephrased this
\b0 \
\
basic form formula\
- this looks like a typo, i.e. that \\Pi should appear instead of one of the \\Sigma. I take it it's not a typo. Is there a way to rephrase this to make it less confusing? For example bring the explanation of the intuition closer to this? \
\

\b ***** We changed the notion of a basic form for FO, so that no confusion is likely. In addition we added a footnote. 
\b0 \
\
By the way, the intuition sounds a lot like Walukiewicz's disjunctive form for the mu calculus. Maybe comment on the relaiton if it's relevant? Or maybe it will come up later with the mu calculus?\
\

\b ***** We say this in the above-mentioned footnote.
\b0 \
\
centered equation\
- T_i is not defined, probably the s \\in \\Sigma should be something else? i?\
\

\b ***** Done
\b0 \
\
"any valuation violating this constraint can be reduced to a valuation satisfying it, without sacrificing the truth of psi"\
-I don't understand this sentence, and suggest rephrasing.\
\

\b ***** We simply deleted this sentence.
\b0 \
\
Proposition 3.15 \\psi^dot was defined in Theorem 3.11 one page ago -- it would be helpful to recall what it is at this point, and/or point to where it is defined.\
\

\b ***** This was actually a typo, and we corrected it.
\b0 \
\
Section 3.2.\
First paragraph. "In light of hte results therein..."\
- I don't understand this sentence.\
\

\b ***** We simplified the sentence.
\b0 \
\
"Intuitively, weakness forbids an automaton to register non-trivial properties concerning the vertical 'dimention'..."\
- Could you provide an example of what you mean by 'property concerning the vertical dimention'\
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
\
Section 3.4 and Section 3.5.\
\

\b **** In order to stay as close as possible to the page limit we decided to omit all proofs of (what was) section 3.4 and 3.5.\

\b0 \
\
Section 4.\
Theorem 4.2.\
- It is not clear how much of the proof you intend to give. Perhaps be a bit more explicit about whether "the proof proceeds by induction..." is an overview of a proof that will be given in detail later, or is this all that the reader will get, plus the simulation theorem?\
\

\b ***** We added two paragraph to clarify this point.
\b0 \
\
Section 4.1\
"carrier A"\
- here and elsewhere, what is a carrier?\
\

\b ***** In the definition of a parity automata, we now also define what a carrier is.
\b0 \
\
The opening explanation is very helpful here. However I am struggling with understanding the notion of "non-deterministic in a finite number of places and otherwise alternating" because intuitively non-determinism should be a special case of alternation. Is there anything you could add the the explanation to align it with this intuition?\
\

\b ***** We added a hopefully clarifying remark here.
\b0 \
\
Section 5.\
\
"P)-labeled trees"\
\

\b ***** Done
\b0 \
\
modelss -> models\
\

\b ***** Done
\b0 \
\
Definition 5.3.\
- (same as everywhere) This would be a nice spot for explaining what a noetherian variant of T might look like, preferably with an example, and what kinds fo collections of classes of tree models are closed under noetherian projections.\
\

\b ***** TODO
\b0 \
\
Sections 6 and 7 make for difficult reading without an intuition of what noetherian and continuous properties look like. I ran out of steam, and time, and don't have inline comments on these sections.\
\
\
\
*************\
\
\
Referee: 2\
\
The paper is generally well-written,\'a0 I have only a couple of minor comments\
that should not be difficult to implement.\
\
\
Minor comments\
\
Page 2\
The fact that our best model-checking algorithms for \uc0\u956 ML\
are exponential in the alternation depth of fixpoint operators...\
Since the discovery in 2017 of a new algorithm for parity games running in\
deterministic time n^\{log n\},\'a0 this claim is no more true (the paper\
by Calude et al. at STOC 2017, and many followers).\'a0 \'a0Clearly,\
the alternation depth has impact on the\'a0 complexity, however if it goes\
above log n, the exponent can be reduced to log n.\'a0 You may\
still evoke the complexity argument in the motivation,\'a0 but in a more\
careful way.\
\
\

\b ***** the concerned part has been rewritten
\b0 \
\
\
Page 6, line 20: At last, Section (7) -->\'a0 Section 7\
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
Page 9,\'a0 the paragraph after Proposition 2.2\
It can also be also given...\
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
Def. 2.3\'a0 ...co-noetherian fragment... dually...\'a0 I understand that\
duality here means just replacing \\mu by \\nu (?), but\
suggest to state this explicitly.\
\

\b ***** done 
\b0 \
\
Page 10,\'a0 Def. 2.6.\'a0 Again,\'a0 I think it will be instructive to define\
the dual fragment explicitly (which now comprises both fixed points\
and modalities). \
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
Page 12 line 28: sublety (subtlety?)\
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
Page 13,\'a0 Definition 3.1. Is A in the second paragraph ("any set A") a\
set of predicates, as in the previous paragraph?\'a0 If not,\'a0 maybe some\
other letter would be appropriate.\
\

\b ***** it is the same
\b0 \
\
The English in the lines 29-30 should checked,\'a0 in my understanding it\
is rather\'a0 L_1(A), which is assigned to A, and not vice-versa.\'a0 Alternatively,\'a0 one can say\
that A is sent to L_1(A).\
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
Definition 3.2. It is a nuance,\'a0 but the comments (like "very simple")\
would be more appropriate before or after the definition.\'a0 \'a0Placing\
it inside the definition looks as if "very simple" was a new concept\
introduced here.\
\

\b ***** rephrased
\b0 \
\
Page 16.\'a0 The first formula (line 10) should be verified; the letters\
seem incorrect (what is T_i here?).\'a0 \
\

\b ***** yes, changed
\b0 \
\
Also, in the definition of phi just\
before, what is the scope of the disjunction (\\bigvee)?\'a0 (Presumably\
all sets of types \\Sigma ?)\
\

\b ***** we rephrased the concerned sentence
\b0 \
\
After the second formula (line 17),\'a0 I guess the inclusion Pi\
\\subseteq \\vec\{T\} is componentwise,\'a0 but it should be said.\
\

\b ***** we rephrased the concerned sentence
\b0 \
\
Theorem 3.12 (1).\'a0 Is the prime (\\Sigma') intentional?\'a0 It makes sense\
but is not quite compatible with the definition of basic form for FO_1 above.\
\

\b ***** \\Sigma\'92 should be \\Sigma (CHECK)
\b0 \
\
Page 17,\'a0 Definition 3.14.\'a0 \'a0The notation V^\{-1\}(d) should definitely\
be explained, or perhaps changed.\'a0 \'a0I suppose it means \{ a :\'a0 \'a0d in\
V(a)\}, so that separation means that each d belongs to at most one\
V(b) with b\'a0 \\in B. But it is rather non-standard usage of the\
notation V^\{-1\}(d), which could be also understood as the inverse\
image of\'a0 the singleton \{d\},\'a0 \'a0i.e., \{ a : \{d\} = V(a)\}.\
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
\
Page 18, lines 13--16. Rather: loses immediately (one may loose\
patience, but lose the game :)\
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
Page 23, line 8: A^0, A^1 -->\'a0 A_0, A_1.\
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
\
Lines 44-46. The definition of the ordering is indeed natural, but it\
is not clear (at this moment), which of the two clusters is called "higher".\
\

\b ***** this relation between clusters was define after Definition 3.19 (now Definition 4.19). To make the text more readable we put the discussion on clusters as a remark, and make reference to it.
\b0 \
\
Page 35,\'a0 Definition 5.3,\'a0 ")" superfluous.\
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
Page 38, Proposition 6.3. Unless I have overlooked something, the\
notation LFP appears here for the first time, and although it is known\
for many readers, it would be suitable to explain it briefly.\
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
Page 39,\'a0 Proposition 6.5. It is a tiny detail,\'a0 but in the previous\
formulas (e.g. Prop. 6.3), harpoon occurred as a subscript.\
\

\b ***** corrected
\b0 \
\
BTW\'a0 (cf. the remark before Prop. 6.5),\'a0 I think that a transfinite induction is\
in\'a0 not needed there. It two monotone functions satisfy F \\leq G then\
any prefixpoint of G is also a prefixpoint of F (which implies the claim).\
\

\b ***** yes, thank you. changed
\b0 \
\
\
Page 41,\'a0 the proof of Theorem 6.9. Alternatively you could show that\
the set of points r satisfying condition (31) of Proposition 6.3 is a\
prefix point (omitting induction).\'a0 A similar remark applies to the\
proof of Proposition 6.13.\'a0 \'a0(But I don't impose this solution.)\
\

\b ***** we prefer to keep the proof as it is.  (OK?)
\b0 \
\
Definition 6.10. Please tell who starts the game.\
\

\b ***** Please note that in our set-up we make a distinction between games (that do not have a first player) and 
\i initialised 
\i0 games (where we explicitly indicate the starting position, thus also fixing the player who is to move first). Details are in section 2.2.
\b0 \
\
Page 43, condition (2) (line 14): distinguisg --> distinguishing\
(?)\
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
Page 45,\'a0 line 36, ")" superfluous.\'a0 \
\

\b ***** done
\b0 \
\
Page 46, the first formula (line 6): the first symbol (\\bigvee ) seems\
to be superfluous.\'a0 \
\

\b ***** yes, erased
\b0 \
\
Also,\'a0 \'a0as far as I understand,\'a0 the formula\
\\alpha_\{\\Sigma \}\'a0 occurring there (defined on the previous page)\
depends on both \\Sigma and \\Pi,\'a0 which is not reflected in the notation.\
\

\b ***** added as suggested}