{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1504\cocoasubrtf830
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red25\green25\blue25;}
{\*\expandedcolortbl;;\cssrgb\c12941\c12941\c12941;}
\paperw11900\paperh16840\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10800\viewh8400\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\partightenfactor0

\f0\fs20 \cf2 \expnd0\expndtw0\kerning0
Referee: 2\
\
Recommendation: Needs Minor Revision\
\
Comments:\
The authors contribute to a research program that compares the\
expressive power of various logical constructs,\'a0 in particular monadic\
quantifiers\'a0 vs. modal operators and fixed points.\'a0 \
The origin of this program goes back to a discovery by van Benthem pairing\
modal logic with 1st order logic, later\'a0 extended by Janin and\
Walukiewicz in the well-known way: the modal Mu-calculus is\
equivalent, in its expressive power, to the bisimulation invariant\
fragment of monadic second-order order logic (MSO).\'a0 The authors of\
the present paper search for a refinement of this result, and focus on a relevant sub-logic of the\
Mu-calculus, namely its alternation-free fragment.\'a0 \'a0It was known that\
for ranked trees (of bounded arity) this logic is equivalent to WMSO\
(where the quantifiers range over finite sets only).\'a0 However,\'a0 for\
arbitrary labeled transition systems the equivalence does not hold\
even modulo bisimilarity (for rather fundamental reasons).\
\
The authors argue that a right analogue of the Janin-Walukiewicz theorem\
consists here of two equivalencies involving two new logics:\'a0 \'a0\
WMSO is equivalent modulo bisimilarity\'a0 to a continuous (rather than\
alternation-free) fragment of the Mu-calculus,\'a0 \'a0whereas the\
alternation-free fragment corresponds to the so-called Noetherian\
fragment of MSO, where quantifiers are restricted to Noetherian\
(rather than finite) sets.\
\
In my opinion, it is a highly valuable contribution to computer science logic and\
I strongly recommend acceptance of the paper.\
\
The proof uses automata and on a very general level follows the line\
of the original proof of Janin and Walukiewicz. However,\'a0 it brings\
much new insight into the matter, which is now more complex. The first\
step was to find the missing\'a0 counterparts in the\
characterizations mentioned above.\'a0 \'a0The next\'a0 step was the choice of a\
right variant of automata. Indeed, the proof was a real tour de force\
of the automata-theoretic techniques.\'a0 \'a0In particular,\'a0 it involved\
two novel\'a0 variants of the simulation theorem (transforming\
alternating automata into deterministic ones) adapted to the\
automata in consideration.\'a0 \
\
The use of the infinity quantifier in the\'a0 "one step logic" (instead of\
full WMSO) was a quite ingenious idea.\
I have also much appreciated the results of section 7,\'a0 that give\
an interesting\'a0 insight into the relation between the\'a0 Mu-calculus and MSO,\
independently of automata. (The results translate the restricted\
mu-calculi into the corresponding fragments of the MSO.)\
\
The present paper is based on two conference papers and two dissertations.\
The authors discuss this issue in the introduction, and I am\'a0 \
convinced that the amounts and quality of new elements\'a0 justifies a journal publication.\
\
The paper is generally well-written,\'a0 I have only a couple of minor comments\
that should not be difficult to implement.\
\
\
Minor comments\
\
Page 2\
The fact that our best model-checking algorithms for \uc0\u956 ML\
are exponential in the alternation depth of fixpoint operators...\
\
Since the discovery in 2017 of a new algorithm for parity games running in\
deterministic time n^\{log n\},\'a0 this claim is no more true (the paper\
by Calude et al. at STOC 2017, and many followers).\'a0 \'a0Clearly,\
the alternation depth has impact on the\'a0 complexity, however if it goes\
above log n, the exponent can be reduced to log n.\'a0 You may\
still evoke the complexity argument in the motivation,\'a0 but in a more\
careful way.\
\
Page 6, line 20: At last, Section (7) -->\'a0 Section 7\
\
Page 9,\'a0 the paragraph after Proposition 2.2\
It can also be also given...\
\
Def. 2.3\'a0 ...co-noetherian fragment... dually...\'a0 I understand that\
duality here means just replacing \\mu by \\nu (?), but\
suggest to state this explicitly.\
\
Page 10,\'a0 Def. 2.6.\'a0 Again,\'a0 I think it will be instructive to define\
the dual fragment explicitly (which now comprises both fixed points\
and modalities). \
\
Page 12 line 28: sublety (subtlety?)\
\
Page 13,\'a0 Definition 3.1. Is A in the second paragraph ("any set A") a\
set of predicates, as in the previous paragraph?\'a0 If not,\'a0 maybe some\
other letter would be appropriate.\
The English in the lines 29-30 should checked,\'a0 in my understanding it\
is rather\'a0 L_1(A), which is assigned to A, and not vice-versa.\'a0 Alternatively,\'a0 one can say\
that A is sent to L_1(A).\
\
Definition 3.2. It is a nuance,\'a0 but the comments (like "very simple")\
would be more appropriate before or after the definition.\'a0 \'a0Placing\
it inside the definition looks as if "very simple" was a new concept\
introduced here.\
\
Page 16.\'a0 The first formula (line 10) should be verified; the letters\
seem incorrect (what is T_i here?).\'a0 Also, in the definition of phi just\
before, what is the scope of the disjunction (\\bigvee)?\'a0 (Presumably\
all sets of types \\Sigma ?)\
\
After the second formula (line 17),\'a0 I guess the inclusion Pi\
\\subseteq \\vec\{T\} is componentwise,\'a0 but it should be said.\
\
Theorem 3.12 (1).\'a0 Is the prime (\\Sigma') intentional?\'a0 It makes sense\
but is not quite compatible with the definition of basic form for FO_1 above.\
\
Page 17,\'a0 Definition 3.14.\'a0 \'a0The notation V^\{-1\}(d) should definitely\
be explained, or perhaps changed.\'a0 \'a0I suppose it means \{ a :\'a0 \'a0d in\
V(a)\}, so that separation means that each d belongs to at most one\
V(b) with b\'a0 \\in B. But it is rather non-standard usage of the\
notation V^\{-1\}(d), which could be also understood as the inverse\
image of\'a0 the singleton \{d\},\'a0 \'a0i.e., \{ a : \{d\} = V(a)\}.\
\
\
Page 18, lines 13--16. Rather: loses immediately (one may loose\
patience, but lose the game :)\
\
Page 23, line 8: A^0, A^1 -->\'a0 A_0, A_1.\
\
\
Lines 44-46. The definition of the ordering is indeed natural, but it\
is not clear (at this moment), which of the two clusters is called "higher".\
\
Page 35,\'a0 Definition 5.3,\'a0 ")" superfluous.\
\
Page 38, Proposition 6.3. Unless I have overlooked something, the\
notation LFP appears here for the first time, and although it is known\
for many readers, it would be suitable to explain it briefly.\
\
Page 39,\'a0 Proposition 6.5. It is a tiny detail,\'a0 but in the previous\
formulas (e.g. Prop. 6.3), harpoon occurred as a subscript.\
BTW\'a0 (cf. the remark before Prop. 6.5),\'a0 I think that a transfinite induction is\
in\'a0 not needed there. It two monotone functions satisfy F \\leq G then\
any prefixpoint of G is also a prefixpoint of F (which implies the claim).\
\
Page 41,\'a0 the proof of Theorem 6.9. Alternatively you could show that\
the set of points r satisfying condition (31) of Proposition 6.3 is a\
prefix point (omitting induction).\'a0 A similar remark applies to the\
proof of Proposition 6.13.\'a0 \'a0(But I don't impose this solution.)\
\
Definition 6.10. Please tell who starts the game.\
\
Page 43, condition (2) (line 14): distinguisg --> distinguishing\
(?)\
\
Page 45,\'a0 line 36, ")" superfluous.\'a0 \
\
Page 46, the first formula (line 6): the first symbol (\\bigvee ) seems\
to be superfluous.\'a0 Also,\'a0 \'a0as far as I understand,\'a0 the formula\
\\alpha_\{\\Sigma \}\'a0 occurring there (defined on the previous page)\
depends on both \\Sigma and \\Pi,\'a0 which is not reflected in the notation.\
\
End of the report.\
\
\
Additional Questions:\
Please help ACM create a more efficient time-to-publication process: Using your best judgment, what amount of copy editing do you think this paper needs?: Light\
\
Most ACM journal papers are researcher-oriented. Is this paper of potential interest to developers and engineers?: Maybe}